.. Documentation for the basic eigenvalue demo in DOLFIN

.. _demos_la_eigenvalue_python_documentation:

A simple eigenvalue solver
==========================

We recommend that you are familiar with the demo for the Poisson equation
before looking at this demo.

.. include:: ../common.txt

If you want a more complex problem, we suggest that you look at the
other eigenvalue demo.


Implementation
--------------

This demo is implemented in a single Python file,
:download:`demo_eigenvalue.py`, which contains both the variational
forms and the solver.

The eigensolver functionality in DOLFIN relies on the library SLEPc
which in turn relies on the linear algebra library PETSc. Therefore,
both PETSc and SLEPc are required for this demo. We can test whether
PETSc and SLEPc are available, and exit if not, as follows:

.. code-block:: python

  from dolfin import *

  # Test for PETSc and SLEPc
  if not has_linear_algebra_backend("PETSc"):
      print "DOLFIN has not been configured with PETSc. Exiting."
      exit()

  if not has_slepc():
      print "DOLFIN has not been configured with SLEPc. Exiting."
      exit()

First, we need to construct the matrix :math:`A`. This will be done in
three steps: defining the mesh and the function space associated with
it; constructing the variational form defining the matrix; and then
assembling this form. The code is shown below:

.. code-block:: python

  # Define mesh, function space
  mesh = Mesh("../box_with_dent.xml.gz")
  V = FunctionSpace(mesh, "Lagrange", 1)

  # Define basis and bilinear form
  u = TrialFunction(V)
  v = TestFunction(V)
  a = dot(grad(u), grad(v))*dx

  # Assemble stiffness form
  A = PETScMatrix()
  assemble(a, tensor=A)

Note that we (in this example) first define the matrix ``A`` as a
:py:class:`PETScMatrix <dolfin.cpp.PETScMatrix>` and then assemble the
form into it. This is an easy way to ensure that the matrix has the
right type.

In order to solve the eigenproblem, we need to define an
eigensolver. To solve a standard eigenvalue problem, the eigensolver
is initialized with a single argument, namely the matrix ``A``.

.. code-block:: python

  # Create eigensolver
  eigensolver = SLEPcEigenSolver(A)

Now, we ready solve the eigenproblem by calling the :py:func:`solve
<dolfin.cpp.SLEPcEigenSolver.solve>` method of the eigensolver. Note
that eigenvalue problems tend to be computationally intensive and may
hence take a while.

.. code-block:: python

  # Compute all eigenvalues of A x = \lambda x
  print "Computing eigenvalues. This can take a minute."
  eigensolver.solve()

The result is kept by the eigensolver, but can fortunately be
extracted. Here, we have computed all eigenvalues, and they will be
sorted by largest magnitude. We can extract the real and complex part
(``r`` and ``c``) of the largest eigenvalue and the real and complex
part of the corresponding eigenvector (``ru`` and ``cu``) by asking
for the first eigenpair as follows:

.. code-block:: python

  # Extract largest (first) eigenpair
  r, c, rx, cx = eigensolver.get_eigenpair(0)

Finally, we want to examine the results. The eigenvalue can easily be
printed. But, the real part of eigenvector is probably most easily
visualized by constructing the corresponding eigenfunction. This can
be done by creating a :py:class:`Function
<dolfin.functions.function.Function>` in the function space ``V``
and the associating eigenvector ``rx`` with the Function. Then the
eigenfunction can be manipulated as any other :py:class:`Function
<dolfin.functions.function.Function>`, and in particular plotted:

.. code-block:: python

  print "Largest eigenvalue: ", r

  # Initialize function and assign eigenvector
  u = Function(V)
  u.vector()[:] = rx

  # Plot eigenfunction
  plot(u)
  interactive()


Complete code
-------------

.. literalinclude:: demo_eigenvalue.py
   :start-after: # Begin demo
