
###################################################################
Dolfin-adjoint wins the 2015 Wilkinson Prize for Numerical Software
###################################################################

| Featured article 2015-06-12
| *Created by Simon W. Funke and Marie E. Rognes*

Every four years the Numerical Algorithms Group (NAG), the National
Physical Laboratory (NPL) and Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) award
the Wilkinson Prize for Numerical Software in honour of the
outstanding contributions of Dr James Hardy Wilkinson to the field of
numerical software. The 2015 Wilkinson Prize for Numerical Software
will be awarded to the Patrick E. Farrell (University of Oxford),
Simon W. Funke (Simula Research Laboratory), David A. Ham (Imperial
College London) and Marie E. Rognes (Simula Research Laboratory) for
dolfin-adjoint[1]. The presentation of the award will take place at the
International Congress on Industrial and Applied Mathematics
(ICIAM 2015) in Beijing, August 10-14, 2015.

Speaking of the 2015 winning software, Mike Dewar, Chair of the
Wilkinson Prize Board of Trustees and Chief Technical Officer at NAG,
said [2]: "dolfin-adjoint is an excellent piece of software that can
solve problems in a range of application areas. Through its elegant
use of high-level abstractions it makes performing what is usually a
very challenging piece of computation seem extremely natural."

.. image:: images/approach.png
   :scale: 60%

Figure 1: Dolfin-adjoint derives the adjoint and tangent linear models
from the high-level problem specification in FEniCS

The dolfin-adjoint project (www.dolfin-adjoint.org) is a FEniCS
Application that automatically derives and solves adjoint and tangent
linear equations from the high-level problem specification. By adding
a few lines of code to an existing FEniCS model, dolfin-adjoint
computes tangent linear and adjoint solutions, gradients and Hessian
actions of arbitrary user-specified functionals, and uses these
derivatives in combination with sophisticated optimization algorithms
or to conduct stability analyses. The derived models use an advanced
checkpointing scheme, run natively in parallel and achieve
theoretically optimal performance, all of which are key properties
that are difficult to achieve with traditional algorithmic
differentiation techniques.

.. image:: images/code.png
   :scale: 45%

.. image:: images/poisson-topology-2d.png
   :scale: 38%

.. image:: images/poisson-topology-3d.png
   :scale: 55%

Figure 2: Example of a topology optimisation for the design of a heat
sink with dolfin-adjoint. The left image shows an implementation
excerpt (the full code has 56 lines). The middle and the right images
show the optimal sink material distribution in 2D and 3D,
respectively.

The Wilkinson Prize was established to honour the outstanding
contributions of Dr James Hardy Wilkinson to the field of numerical
software. Speaking of the Wilkinson Prize in 2014, Dewar said [3]:
“High quality numerical algorithms underpin much of the software that
we all use on a daily basis, yet the skills needed to implement them
are rarely given the recognition that they deserve.  With the
Wilkinson Prize we seek to redress this balance and celebrate the
achievements of talented younger individuals in this area.  We believe
that the Wilkinson Prize is unique in that all the software entered is
examined and tested by the reviewers, and the award is made primarily
on the basis of the quality of the software, its documentation, and
its testing regime.”

******************************
References and acknowledgments
******************************

[1] http://www.nag.com/other/WilkinsonPrize.html

[2] http://www.scientificcomputing.com/news/2015/06/partial-differential-equations-dolfin-adjoint-wins-2015-wilkinson-prize-numerical-software

[3] http://www.nag.com/awarding-outstanding-achievements-in-numerical-software-wilkinson-prize
